My fermentation is still active. It's much slower.
We can see that it's not as bubbly as it was the last two days.
But we have, you see these little volcanoes every now and then.
And I still have a bubble. I still have CO2 production.
If I have CO2 production, it's not oxidizing. My fermentation is safer.
So I can go to bed and say, "I'll deal with you in the morning."
And I don't have to run and say, "Oh, my coffee's going to get ruined."
So you have that safety.
So this coffee now has been here 45 hours, I think.
You can look at, Fenty and I just did the math really quickly.
So my goal was 36, but we're at 44, and I'm not worried about it.
And again, it's not because more is better.
So I'm just like people first and process first.
Like what is the most convenient thing, that's when I'm going to wash it.
I'm not trying to hit some maximum target.
So what we're going to do now is we're going to open it up, we're going to mix it,
we're going to take our final data points, and we're going to wash it.
And if you want the information from last night, Francie has it in her water pH list.
Francie?
[Spanish]
(speaking in foreign language)
Temperature, Francie, 22.9, but this is before mixing.
So I want to see how it changes after mixing.
That, we're going to put it in the back.
Yes, it looks like it has a grease, but it doesn't.
It's not.
It's not?
No.
I'm going to put it in the back.
Because it's not.
It's not.
So, you get the strainer.
[ Background noise ]
>> And my grease, 21.9, but that's before mixing.
>> So it's agroechad, we're going to-- I guess--
(speaking in foreign language)
(coughing)
[Spanish]
So one of the things that came up that Valeria had a question was if we know coffee loses some density as it's submerged, as there's water,
if we're skimming and we're taking it out after it's been soaking, there's a concern that we're taking out the roots,
that there's actually coffee that should stay in. And for coffee, we'll lose some density, but not enough to make it soapy.
So if you look at all of these, they're very much infected.
They're very much insect damage.
They're dark.
They're just completely hollow.
They're very light.
So we don't have to worry about that.
So every time I open, I just take a chance
to clean it off, because that's less work in the sorting later.
(water splashing)
(speaking in foreign language)
This is the other thing that I want to see.
Even though there was very little activity
when we uncovered it, as he's mixing it,
you can still see that there's a lot of bubbling,
there's a lot of CO2 still being released.
Still a healthy fermentation.
And you guys can get close and you can smell.
(speaking in foreign language)
[Spanish]
You guys want first two things to notice how clean it feels like gravel. It's very gravel. It's very dry
And so to me it smells like I was gonna say like a fruit cocktail like
cantaloupe
Green banana like there's a very fresh
Yeah, but like a green banana not like a very ripe banana
Melon
Oh yeah, white beer?
I don't know about beer. I've never tried it.
It's a bit bitter.
Yeah, there is a little hint of low alcohol.
Because the yeast are producing alcohol. That's correct.
Come on, bring the man some happiness.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Oh, bring the man some coffee!
Yeah, it smells really good.
Really on your nose.
Very clean.
No?
So let's get our temperature again.
How is it?
Is it good?
It's good.
So you must be a bird.
(speaking in foreign language)
- It went up a little bit. - Yes, it went up a little bit.
- Francie, 22.3. - It went up a little bit.
[Spanish]
[Inaudible]
Yes.
So the fermentation has slowed down quite a bit.
Is that because it's running out of food?
I think it's running out of food, and remember there's only a certain number of generations
that the yeast are active and so it just could be running out of its
generations. It's dying.
So if you wanted a longer fermentation and you added nutrients?
Yes.
Would that keep it going?
Exactly.
Would the acidity still be much more?
Not necessarily because as it's going through all of these generations,
each generation is a little more resistant, a little more adapted, a little bit better at dealing with the high acid difficult conditions.
So at this point, and this is the experiment that Julie's going to do in her farm,
she's going to do an experiment where she's going to add nutrient halfway through the fermentation,
at the beginning and halfway through, to see if we can accelerate and keep it going.
So yes, at this point, the yeast are very tired.
They've had a lot of generations, they've depleted the nutrients, and we're not feeding them again.
So if we wanted to say hit 100 hours for some reason,
then I would add some nutrients at this point, much more than sugar.
There's still some sugar in here like they haven't totally consumed even though they're they're clean of mucilage. It's still in the liquid
So I would go nutrients before I would do sugar, but if you don't have nutrients
Thing that maybe likes the acidic environment a little more yeah, so lactic acid bacteria
So now we've created a lot of acid so now we can use the acid as a food source
Yeah, exactly. So at this point you could like flip it to a bacterial fermentation
It's hard to say because they've been in here the whole time so they're better adapted you're not pitching new
bacteria that is like more into the environment meaning it just hasn't been adapted so that whatever is in here has been slowly
Acclimating they're not that active. They're not dominating, but they've been slowly activating
So one idea that John Marco just said is if we add salt now
Potentially then we're going to really eliminate the rest of our yeast that is here
And if there's any lactic bacteria that kind of survived that's just been like dormant
That's just been hanging out waiting then maybe that can take over
I'd add kombucha.
Yep.
Oh yeah.
Kombucha would make sense at this point because the high acidity is already adapted for...
They're already used to that.
Yeah, they're already used to that.
You have a mixture of yeast and bacteria, so you could...
Is there a risk of...
Are we acetobacter?
At this point?
It should be like we're moving back.
No, because acetobacter is an obligate arobe, and we've been not only anaerobic underneath
the surface, but we've been pretty careful to cover it, and we still have that CO2 production.
So because it's an obligate arobe at this point, no, but it doesn't mean it's not there.
We're just not letting it dominate.
And that's not limiting the balance, right?
It's not.
Acetobacter is tough because it's one of those degrees, like a small level, we were talking
about this with John Markle, a small level is fruity and really pleasant at like 10 grams
per liter concentration.
But if you get up to that 15, then you just hit vinegar.
So it's this really thin line between really pleasant, bright fruitiness and vinegar.
So for me it's a little bit like playing with fire because trying to hit that mark of just
enough acetic acid that you don't get vinegar is like...
There's other ways to get those fruity flavors without risking the vinegar.
But if you wanted to risk, at this point you'd need an aeration?
It would need an aeration.
What I would do at that point is I would kind of like strain it.
Like I wouldn't wash it.
I would just like lift it up like this and put it on a bed.
And just put it directly on the bed and then you could be encouraging acetobacter by not
washing it.
A pesar que no tenga mucho musculo.
Alright, let's get our pH and let's get our BRX.
BRX.
Ah, so that's a good one.
Alright, let's get our pH and let's get our bricks.
(inaudible)
Three.
The bricks is three.
[Spanish]
So if you'll notice, the readings from this morning are exactly the same as last night.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
So if you'll notice, the readings from this morning
are exactly the same as last night.
So our numbers say that our friction is the same,
our pH is the same.
It was a pool overnight, so that's not surprising.
But I still saw some activity.
I still saw bubbles.
So I know that you can't just go by the numbers.
You have to by numbers and look and feel.
So what we're gonna do now is we're going to rinse this,
wash it, and put it on the beds.
Oh, sorry, lactic.
Let's look at the lactic.
(speaking in foreign language)
[Spanish]
[ Background noise ]
It's like the cold cherries over there are delicious.
Not yet. I want to see.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
If you guys wanna touch this, it's almost there, but
it's not as clean as the [FOREIGN]
>> [FOREIGN]
>> There are some that are still
hot though.
(speaking in foreign language)
We still have something that is yeast.
So it's the most difficult thing to do.
It takes longer.
But also, this lactic bacteria is not as aggressive as yeast.
Yeast starts very fast, has good activity, and goes fast.
This bacteria, because we don't inoculate with bacteria, we only change the environment.
So the load is much lower.
The load is much lower.
Yes.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[ Inaudible ]
(speaking in foreign language)
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
cut it, cut it to this point and change to honey and leave another one that continues
with washing and have two different profiles of the same coffee.
Sure.
I leave it longer for you.
What would happen with the one from there that has been turned on practically all the
time?
If we take it out and we don't wash it, we put it in the bed, how would it change
versus one that we do change it, we wash it?
It depends.
I tell the producers to do the rehearsal, to take it out, drain it and put it directly on the bed
and wash it very well, wash it completely and then dry it
and in the end, if the two cups are the same, what a good result, because if the cup is the same, all that effort and all that water is removed
And if the rate is different, good news because there are two profile options.
In each case, it is good news.
And also, as it no longer has a syllable, there is very little risk that a pregnancy may occur.
Yes, exactly.
So it may be that there is no difference or it changes a lot.
It depends on each place and on the raw material.
(speaking in foreign language)
So, what we were just talking about was,
So the idea of taking the coffee out now, like I said, taking it out and just letting
it drip and putting it on the bed without washing it.
So that would give you a style of honey because you still have some miso-nish around the...
So you did a like a washed fermentation process and then a honey drying.
And then John Marco was saying, well, would that be the same or different if we washed
washed in and dried, what would be the flavor difference? So I said each producer needs to try that on their own.
So like we would take this and maybe cut it in half, leave half of it and just put it directly on the bed and the
other half wash it really thoroughly and then put it on the bed and then taste those at the end.
And if those two cups are the same, if there's no difference, that's excellent news because it means you don't need to waste all that water.
You don't need to waste all that effort drying it or washing it and then putting it up there.
So you can it's just more efficient. You can just go straight to the bed
And if they have a different flavor
Then that's excellent news too because now you have two flavor profiles from the same process
All you have to do is one tiny step at the end and you get two different things
So either way, it's great news. If there's no difference or if there is a difference
And it's going to depend on each place
No, no, no, it's a different place
I've been to some places where there's no difference
And I'm like hooray! You don't have to use waste water in other places
It's very difficult to try with any sugar on your feet.
It just takes forever.
And then you have mold risk and defects.
And now we're going to wash.
Ya es hora de lavar.
with the kimchi soup
and now we're gonna wash
ya, es hora de lavar
(lavaremos)
(cuando vamos a lavar?)
(no, no, no)
(no)
(tengo)
(pero sebas, lo que quiero)
(es poner el chasame)
(poner el chasame)
(me or to like drain)
like three.
[ Background noise ]
Yeah, so this one we would use the holder connection
to drain the liquid.
So you could drain the liquid and collect it and put it
in a new fermentation.
So you would use your at least twice that way.
Are you wondering why there's like a--
There's a lot of water in the lockup, as you ever say.
But this one doesn't have a--
I don't know why they did that.
I'll ask the people at the actual facility
for the purpose of that.
They ran out of parts.
[LAUGHTER]
[INAUDIBLE]
Well, it's supposed to be that way, and then she's--
[LAUGHTER]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
So I need four strong arms to take these--
we're going to move this table, and we're
going to put these beds in the sun.
I don't want them under here, so all three beds
are going to go in the parking lot in the sun.
[BLANK_AUDIO]